\input texinfo
@setfilename mathgl_en.info
@set VERSION 2.0
@settitle MathGL @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for MathGL (version @value{VERSION}), a collection of classes and routines for scientific plotting. Please report any errors in this manual to @email{mathgl.abalakin@@gmail.org}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Alexey Balakin.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF
supports it in developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory MathGL documentation system
@direntry
* MathGL: (mathgl). The library for scientific graphics.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title MathGL
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}
@author A.A. Balakin (@uref{http://mathgl.sourceforge.net/})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top MathGL

This file documents the Mathematical Graphic Library (MathGL), a collection of classes and routines for scientific plotting. It corresponds to release @value{VERSION} of the library. Please report any errors in this manual to @email{mathgl.abalakin@@gmail.org}. More information about MathGL can be found at the project homepage, @uref{http://mathgl.sourceforge.net/}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Alexey A. Balakin.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF
supports it in developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Examples::
* General concepts::
* MathGL core::
* Widget classes::
* Data processing::
* MGL scripts::
* Other classes::
* TeX-like symbols::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@rmacro sref {arg}
@xref{\arg\}, for sample code and picture.
@end rmacro
@macro tdref{nam}
@uref{http://mathgl.sourceforge.net/pdf_u3d/\nam\.pdf, 3D pdf}
@end macro


@node Overview, Examples, , Top
@include overview_en.texi

@node Examples, General concepts, Overview, Top
@include example_en.texi

@node General concepts, MathGL core, Examples, Top
@include concept_en.texi

@node MathGL core, Widget classes, General concepts, Top
@include core_en.texi

@node Widget classes, Data handling, MathGL core, Top
@include widget_en.texi

@node Data processing, MGL scripts, Widget classes, Top
@include data_en.texi

@node MGL scripts, Other classes, Data processing, Top
@include parse_en.texi

@node Other classes, TeX-like symbols, MGL scripts, Top
@include other_en.texi

@node TeX-like symbols, Copying This Manual, Other classes, Top
@appendix TeX-like symbols
@include appendix_en.texi

@node Copying This Manual, Index, TeX-like symbols, Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@node Index, , Copying This Manual, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
