\input texinfo
@setfilename mathgl_ru.info
@c @documentlanguage ru
@documentencoding UTF-8
@set VERSION 1.11
@settitle MathGL @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp
@comment %**end of header

@copying
Это документация для MathGL (версии @value{VERSION}) -- библиотеки классов и функций для построения научной графики. Пожалуйста сообщайте о любых ошибках в этом руководстве на @email{mathgl.abalakin@@gmail.org}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2009 Алексей Балакин.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF
supports it in developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@c @dircategory MathGL documentation system
@c @direntry
@c * MathGL: (mathgl). The library for scientific graphics.
@c @end direntry

@titlepage
@title MathGL
@subtitle версия @value{VERSION}
@author А.А. Балакин (@uref{http://mathgl.sourceforge.net/})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top MathGL

Это документация для MathGL (версии @value{VERSION}) -- библиотеки классов и функций для построения научной графики. Пожалуйста сообщайте о любых ошибках в этом руководстве на @email{mathgl.abalakin@@gmail.org}. Дополнительную информацию о MathGL можно найти на домашней странице проекта @uref{http://mathgl.sourceforge.net/}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2009 Алексей Балакин. 

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to
copy and modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF
supports it in developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Examples::
* MathGL core::
* Plotter classes::
* Widget classes::
* mglData class::
* Other classes::
* MGL interface::
* Samples::
* TeX-like symbols::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@rmacro sref {arg}
См. раздел @ref{\arg\}, для примеров кода и графика.
@end rmacro
@macro tdref{nam}
@uref{http://mathgl.sourceforge.net/pdf_u3d/\nam\.pdf, 3D pdf}
@end macro
@macro MGL
(MGL)
@end macro

@node Overview, Examples, , Top
@include overview_ru.texi

@node Examples, MathGL core, Overview, Top
@include example_ru.texi

@node MathGL core, Plotter classes, Examples, Top
@include core_ru.texi

@node Plotter classes, Widget classes, MathGL core, Top
@include class_ru.texi

@node Widget classes, mglData class, Plotter classes, Top
@include widget_ru.texi

@node mglData class, Other classes, Widget classes, Top
@include data_ru.texi

@node Other classes, MGL interface, mglData class, Top
@include other_ru.texi

@node MGL interface, Samples, Other classes, Top
@include mgl_cmd_ru.texi

@node Samples, TeX-like symbols, MGL interface, Top
@include samples_ru.texi

@node TeX-like symbols, Copying This Manual, Samples, Top
@appendix Символы TeX
@include appendix_ru.texi

@node Copying This Manual, Index, TeX-like symbols, Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@node Index, , Copying This Manual, Top
@unnumbered Индекс

@printindex cp

@bye
