
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@chapter Widget classes
@cindex mglWindow
@cindex mglGLUT
@cindex Fl_MathGL
@cindex QMathGL
@cindex window
@cindex widgets

There are set of ``window'' classes for making a window with MathGL graphics: @code{mglWindow} and @code{mglGLUT} for whole window, @code{Fl_MathGL} and @code{QMathGL} as widgets. All these classes allow user to show, rotate, export, and change view of the plot using keyboard. Most of them (except @code{mglGLUT}) also have toolbar and menu for simplifying plot manipulation. All window classes have mostly the same set of functions.

For callback drawing you can use: @code{NULL} pointer if you'll update plot manually, global function of type @code{int draw(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p)} or @code{int draw(@code{mglGraph *}gr)}, or instance of class derived from @code{mglDraw} class. This class is defined in @code{#include <mgl/window.h>} and have only 2 methods:
@verbatim
class mglDraw
{
public:
    virtual int Draw(mglGraph *) { return 0; };
    virtual void Reload() {};
};
@end verbatim
You should inherit yours class from @code{mglDraw} and re-implement one or both functions for drawing.

@menu
* mglWindow class::
* Fl_MathGL class::
* QMathGL class::
@end menu


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node mglWindow class, Fl_MathGL class, , Widget classes
@section mglWindow class
@cindex mglWindow
@cindex window
@c @cindex mglDraw

This class is derived from mglGraph class (@pxref{MathGL core}). It provide methods for handling window with MathGL graphics.

@deftypefn {Constructor on @code{mglWindow}} {} mglWindow (@code{const char *}title=@code{"MathGL"})
@deftypefnx {Constructor on @code{mglWindow}} {} mglWindow (@code{int} (*draw)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p), @code{const char *}title=@code{"MathGL"}, @code{void *}par=@code{NULL}, @code{int} kind=@code{0}, @code{void} (*reload)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p)=0)
@deftypefnx {Constructor on @code{mglWindow}} {} mglWindow (@code{int} (*draw)(@code{mglGraph *}gr), @code{const char *}title=@code{"MathGL"}, @code{int} kind=@code{0})
@deftypefnx {Constructor on @code{mglWindow}} {} mglWindow (@code{mglDraw *}draw, @code{const char *}title=@code{"MathGL"}, @code{int} kind=@code{0})
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{HMGL} mgl_create_graph_qt (@code{int} (*draw)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p), @code{const char *}title, @code{void *}par, @code{void} (*reload)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p))
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{HMGL} mgl_create_graph_fltk (@code{int} (*draw)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p), @code{const char *}title, @code{void *}par, @code{void} (*reload)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p))
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{HMGL} mgl_create_graph_glut (@code{int} (*draw)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p), @code{const char *}title, @code{void *}par, @code{void} (*reload)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p))

Creates a window for plotting. Parameter @var{draw} sets a pointer to drawing function (this is the name of function) or instance of @code{mglDraw} class. There is support of a list of plots (frames). So as one can prepare a set of frames at first and redraw it fast later (but it requires more memory). Function should return positive number of frames for the list or zero if it will plot directly. Note, that @var{draw} can be @code{NULL} for displaying static bitmaps only (no animation or slides). Parameter @var{title} sets the title of the window. Parameter @var{par} contains pointer to data for the plotting function @var{draw}. Parameter @var{kind} may have following values: @samp{0} -- use FLTK window, @samp{1} -- use Qt window.

There are some keys handles for manipulating by the plot: 'a', 'd', 'w', 's' for the rotating; ',', '.' for viewing of the previous or next frames in the list; 'r' for the switching of transparency; 'f' for the switching of lightning; 'x' for hiding (closing) the window.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{int} RunThr ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_fltk_thr ()
Run main loop for event handling in separate thread. Note, right now it work for FLTK windows only.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{int} Run ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_qt_run ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_fltk_run ()
Run main loop for event handling. Usually it should be called in a separate thread or as last function call in @code{main()}.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} SetClickFunc (@code{void} (*func)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p))
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{void} mgl_set_click_func (@code{void} (*func)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p))
Set callback function @code{func} which will be called on mouse click.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} ToggleAlpha ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_toggle_alpha (@code{HMGL} gr)
Switch on/off transparency but do not overwrite switches in user drawing function.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} ToggleLight ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_toggle_light (@code{HMGL} gr)
Switch on/off lighting but do not overwrite switches in user drawing function.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} ToggleRotate ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_toggle_rotate (@code{HMGL} gr)
Switch on/off rotation by mouse. Usually, left button is used for rotation, middle button for shift, right button for zoom/perspective.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} ToggleZoom ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_toggle_zoom (@code{HMGL} gr)
Switch on/off zooming by mouse. Just select rectangular region by mouse and it will be zoomed in.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} ToggleNo ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_toggle_no (@code{HMGL} gr)
Switch off all zooming and rotation and restore initial state.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} Update ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_update (@code{HMGL} gr)
Update window contents. This is very useful function for manual updating the plot while long calculation was running in parallel thread.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} ReLoad ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_reload (@code{HMGL} gr)
Reload user data and update picture. This function also update number of frames which drawing function can create.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} Adjust ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_adjust (@code{HMGL} gr)
Adjust size of bitmap to window size.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} NextFrame ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_next_frame (@code{HMGL} gr)
Show next frame if one.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} PrevFrame ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_prev_frame (@code{HMGL} gr)
Show previous frame if one.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} Animation ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_animation (@code{HMGL} gr)
Run/stop slideshow (animation) of frames.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} SetDelay (@code{float} dt)
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_wnd_set_delay (@code{HMGL} gr, @code{int} dt)
Sets delay for animation in seconds. Default value is 1 sec.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{void} Setup (@code{bool} clfupd=@code{true}, @code{bool} showpos=@code{false})
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_setup_window (@code{HMGL} gr, @code{bool} clfupd, @code{bool} showpos)
Enable/disable flags for:
@itemize @bullet
@item
clearing plot before Update();
@item
showing the last mouse click position in the widget.
@end itemize
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Method on @code{mglWindow}} @code{mglPoint} LastMousePos ()
@deftypefnx {C function} @code{int} mgl_get_last_mouse_pos (@code{HMGL} gr, @code{float *}x, @code{float *}y, @code{float *}z)
Gets last position of mouse click.
@end deftypefn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Fl_MathGL class, QMathGL class, mglWindow class, Widget classes
@section Fl_MathGL class
@cindex Fl_MathGL
@cindex widgets

Class is FLTK widget which display MathGL graphics (defined in @code{#include <mgl/fltk.h>}).

@fig{fltk, Example of FLTK window with MathGL plot.}

@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_draw (@code{int} (*draw)(@code{HMGL} gr, @code{void *}p))
@deftypemethodx Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_draw (@code{int} (*draw)(@code{mglGraph *}gr))
@deftypemethodx Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_draw (@code{mglDraw *}draw)
Sets drawing function as global function as one from a class @code{mglDraw}. There is support of a list of plots (frames). So as one can prepare a set of frames at first and redraw it fast later (but it requires more memory). Function should return positive number of frames for the list or zero if it will plot directly. Parameter @var{par} contains pointer to data for the plotting function @var{draw}.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} update ()
Update (redraw) plot.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_angle (@code{float} t, @code{float} p)
Set angles for additional plot rotation
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_flag (@code{int} f)
Set bitwise flags for general state (1-Alpha, 2-Light)
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_state (@code{bool} r, @code{bool} z)
Set flags for handling mouse:
@var{z}=@code{true} allow zooming,
@var{r}=@code{true} allow rotation/shifting/perspective and so on.
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_zoom (@code{float} X1, @code{float} Y1, @code{float} X2, @code{float} Y2)
Set zoom in/out region
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} get_zoom (@code{float *}X1, @code{float *}Y1, @code{float *}X2, @code{float *}Y2)
Get zoom in/out region
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_popup (@code{const Fl_Menu_Item *}pmenu, @code{Fl_Widget *}w, @code{void *}v)
Set popup menu pointer
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_graph (@code{mglCanvas *}gr)
@deftypemethodx Fl_MathGL @code{void} set_graph (@code{mglGraph *}gr)
Set new grapher instead of built-in one. Note that Fl_MathGL will automatically delete this object at destruction or at new @code{setGraph()} call.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod Fl_MathGL @code{HMGL} get_graph ()
Get pointer to grapher.
@end deftypemethod

@deftypecv {Fl_MathGL option} Fl_MathGL @code{Fl_Valuator *} tet_val
Pointer to external tet-angle validator.
@end deftypecv
@deftypecv {Fl_MathGL option} Fl_MathGL @code{Fl_Valuator *} phi_val
Pointer to external phi-angle validator.
@end deftypecv

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------
@node QMathGL class, , Fl_MathGL class, Widget classes
@section QMathGL class
@cindex QMathGL
@cindex widgets

Class is Qt widget which display MathGL graphics (defined in @code{#include <mgl/qt.h>}).

@fig{qt, Example of Qt window with MathGL plot.}

@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{void} setDraw (@code{mglDraw *}dr)
Sets drawing functions from a class inherited from @code{mglDraw}.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{void} setDraw (@code{int (*}draw)(@code{mglBase *}gr, @code{void *}p), @code{void *}par=@code{NULL})
@deftypemethodx QMathGL @code{void} setDraw (@code{int (*}draw)(@code{mglGraph *}gr, @code{void *}p))
Sets the drawing function @var{draw}. There is support of a list of plots (frames). So as one can prepare a set of frames at first and redraw it fast later (but it requires more memory). Function should return positive number of frames for the list or zero if it will plot directly. Parameter @var{par} contains pointer to data for the plotting function @var{draw}.
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{void} setGraph (@code{mglCanvas *}gr)
@deftypemethodx QMathGL @code{void} setGraph (@code{mglGraph *}gr)
Set pointer to external grapher (instead of built-in @code{mglCanvas}). Note that QMathGL will automatically delete this object at destruction or at new @code{setGraph()} call.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{HMGL} getGraph ()
Get pointer to grapher.
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{void} setPopup (@code{QMenu *}p)
Set popup menu pointer.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{void} setSize (@code{int} w, @code{int} h)
Set widget/picture sizes
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{double} getRatio ()
Return aspect ratio of the picture.
@end deftypemethod

@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{int} getPer ()
Get perspective value in percents.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{int} getPhi ()
Get Phi-angle value in degrees.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{int} getTet ()
Get Theta-angle value in degrees.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{bool} getAlpha ()
Get transparency state.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{bool} getLight ()
Get lightning state.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{bool} getZoom ()
Get mouse zooming state.
@end deftypemethod
@deftypemethod QMathGL @code{bool} getRotate ()
Get mouse rotation state.
@end deftypemethod


@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} refresh ()
Redraw saved bitmap without executing drawing function.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} update ()
Update picture by executing drawing function.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} copy ()
Copy graphics to clipboard.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} copyClickCoor ()
Copy coordinates of click (as text).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} print ()
Print current picture.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} stop ()
Send signal to stop drawing.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} adjust ()
Adjust image size to fit whole widget.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} nextSlide ()
Show next slide.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} prevSlide ()
Show previous slide.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} animation (@code{bool} st=@code{true})
Start/stop animation.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setPer (@code{int} val)
Set perspective value.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setPhi (@code{int} val)
Set Phi-angle value.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setTet (@code{int} val)
Set Theta-angle value.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setAlpha (@code{bool} val)
Switch on/off transparency.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setLight (@code{bool} val)
Switch on/off lightning.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setGrid (@code{bool} val)
Switch on/off drawing of grid for absolute coordinates.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setZoom (@code{bool} val)
Switch on/off mouse zooming.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setRotate (@code{bool} val)
Switch on/off mouse rotation.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} zoomIn ()
Zoom in graphics.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} zoomOut ()
Zoom out graphics.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} shiftLeft ()
Shift graphics to left direction.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} shiftRight ()
Shift graphics to right direction.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void}shiftUp  ()
Shift graphics to up direction.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} shiftDown ()
Shift graphics to down direction.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} restore ()
Restore zoom and rotation to default values.
@end deftypefn
@c @deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} reload ()
@c Reload data and redraw graphics.
@c @end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportPNG (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to PNG file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportPNGs (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to PNG file (no transparency).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportJPG (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to JPEG file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportBPS (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to bitmap EPS file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportEPS (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to vector EPS file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportSVG (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to SVG file.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportGIF (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to GIF file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportTEX (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to LaTeX/Tikz file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportTGA (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to TGA file.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportXYZ (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to XYZ/XYZL/XYZF file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportOBJ (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to OBJ/MTL file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportSTL (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to STL file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportOFF (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to OFF file.
@end deftypefn
@c @deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportX3D (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
@c Export current picture to X3D file.
@c @end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} exportIDTF (@code{QString} fname=@code{""})
Export current picture to IDTF file.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} setMGLFont (@code{QString} path)
Restore (@var{path}=@code{""}) or load font for graphics.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} about ()
Show about information.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Slot on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} aboutQt ()
Show information about Qt version.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} phiChanged (@code{int} val)
Phi angle changed (by mouse or by toolbar).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} tetChanged (@code{int} val)
Tet angle changed (by mouse or by toolbar).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} perChanged (@code{int} val)
Perspective changed (by mouse or by toolbar).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} alphaChanged (@code{bool} val)
Transparency changed (by toolbar).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} lightChanged (@code{bool} val)
Lighting changed (by toolbar).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} gridChanged (@code{bool} val)
Grid drawing changed (by toolbar).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} zoomChanged (@code{bool} val)
Zooming changed (by toolbar).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} rotateChanged (@code{bool} val)
Rotation changed (by toolbar).
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} mouseClick (@code{float} x, @code{float} y, @code{float} z)
Mouse click take place at position @{x,y,z@}.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} frameChanged (@code{int} val)
Need another frame to show.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} showWarn (@code{QString} warn)
Need to show warning.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} posChanged (@code{QString} pos)
Position of mouse click is changed.
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} objChanged (@code{int} id)
Object id is changed (due to mouse click).
@end deftypefn
@deftypefn {Signal on @code{QMathGL}} @code{void} refreshData ()
Data can be changed (drawing is finished).
@end deftypefn


@deftypecv {QMathGL option} QMathGL @code{QString} appName
Application name for message boxes.
@end deftypecv
@deftypecv {QMathGL option} QMathGL @code{bool} autoResize
Allow auto resizing (default is false).
@end deftypecv

